---
author:
- Mateusz Paszynski
- Evgeniya Ovchinnikova
date: 2024-07-19
title: Cortex XDR Vulnerabilities
---

# Introduction

Four vulnerabilities were discovered within anti-tampering module of
Cortex XDR agent (Palo Alto Networks) run on Windows 10.

![image](disabled_protection.png)

-   Python payload injection

-   Domain verification bypass

-   Hijack execution flow

-   Local Admin can disable Cortex XDR

The vulnerabilities should have been mitigated with the content updates
[CU-1290](https://docs-cortex.paloaltonetworks.com/r/Cortex-XDR/Cortex-XDR-and-Traps-Content-Update-Release-Notes-Version-1290/Version-1290)
and
[CU-1340](https://docs-cortex.paloaltonetworks.com/r/Cortex-XDR/Cortex-XDR-and-Traps-Content-Update-Release-Notes-Version-1340/Exploit-Protection-2).

# Preliminaries

For better understanding of this article, we would like to invite the
reader to get familiar with the following subjects first.

-   **Protected Process Light (PPL)**

    PPL is a technology introduced in Windows 8.1 as part of the
    Microsoft security model. It ensures the OS loads only trusted
    services or process that have an internal signature compliant ot
    Microsoft requirements. This technology is heavily used for
    protecting and controlling security services like anti-viruses. For
    example it should protect against unauthorized shutting down and
    debugging of the protected process, changing the memory,
    impersonation of the thread. Further reading: [Protecting
    anti-malware
    services](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/services/protecting-anti-malware-services-#introduction)
    and [Microsoft Security Servicing Criteria for
    Windows](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/msrc/windows-security-servicing-criteria)

-   **Image File Execution Options (IFEO) Injection**

    IFEO is a feature provided by Windows OS. It can be useful for
    debugging of the application launch. The feature is accessible to
    users through system registries. For each executable, the IFEO
    registries are stored in . By defining the Debugger string value to
    a registry, the developers can define a payload that will be
    executed on launch of the target process. An attacker can exploit
    this feature by adding their malicious payload (e.g. execution of
    some malware.exe) to the Debugger value. Further reading: [Image
    File Execution
    Options](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/previous-versions/windows/desktop/xperf/image-file-execution-options)
    and [Performing IFEO
    Injection](https://www.darkrelay.com/post/ifeo-injection#:~:text=A%20successful%20IFEO%20injection%20involves%20the%20following%3A%201,registry%20%28creating%20the%20mapping%29%20to%20launch%20our%20payload.).

# Timeline

-   Exploited \"Python payload injection\" and \"Domain verification
    bypass\".

-   Exploited \"Hijack execution flow\" and \"Local Admin can disable
    Cortex XDR\".

-   Reported vulnerabilities to Palo Alto Networks.

-   Got a response from Palo Alto Networks with their internal
    identifiers of the vulnerabilities.

-   \"Hijack execution flow\" and \"Local Admin can disable Cortex XDR\"
    got resolved with Content Update 1290. See [Cortex XDR and Traps
    Content Update Release Notes (Version
    1290)](https://docs-cortex.paloaltonetworks.com/r/Cortex-XDR/Cortex-XDR-and-Traps-Content-Update-Release-Notes-Version-1290/Exploit-Protection-4).

-   \"Python payload injection\" and \"Domain verification bypass\" got
    resolved with Content Update 1340. See [Cortex XDR and Traps Content
    Update Release Notes (Version
    1340)](https://docs-cortex.paloaltonetworks.com/r/Cortex-XDR/Cortex-XDR-and-Traps-Content-Update-Release-Notes-Version-1340)

-   Added to Hall of Fame. See [Security Researcher Acknowledgments for
    Palo Alto
    Networks](https://www.paloaltonetworks.com/security-researcher-acknowledgement).

Note, the vulnerabilities did not obtain CVE's.

# Python payload injection

Local admin user can run custom python payloads using
`cortex-xdr-payload.exe`. That requires the parent process to be named
as `cyserver.exe`. As a result we managed to inject malicious python
code into executable signed by Palo Alto Networks.

![Example of injected payload](pyload.png){#fig:pyload width="100%"}

# Domain verification bypass

The `cortex-xdr-payload.exe` is responsible for feature called \"Live
terminal\", which allows the Cortex XDR administrator to perform tasks
and execute command remotely from the cloud service.

By exploiting previously discovered \"Python payload injection\",
`cortex-xdr-payload.exe` can be launched by passing the specially
crafted url as an argument to the `cortex-xdr-payload.exe`. The example
of maliciously crafted URL payload is
\"myevilsite.com/?paloaltonetworks.com\". For us this was a websocket
server we have set up for testing purposes. The executable verifies the
URL only by checking if it ends with \"paloaltonetworks.com\" string.
That allowed us to launch \"Live Terminal\" and connect it to command
and control server.

![Successful connection to command and control
server](domain_bypass.png){#fig:agent width="100%"}

![Server site logs - received
request](domain_bypass_response.png){#fig:c2 width="100%"}

# Hijack execution flow

Local administrator can manipulate IFEO keys for any Palo Alto Networks
image that is being executed as child process of `cyserver.exe` to
launch custom application. When this application is launched under
`cyserver.exe`, it is neither prevented nor monitored against any
malicious activity. That made us undetectable for Cortex XDR. The attack
requires reboot or administrative action from the cloud (initializing
the live terminal or launching custom script).

# Local Admin can disable Cortex XDR

The protection of Cortex XDR can be disabled by a local admin user. The
attack is performed through manipulation of the IFEO registry. By
default, the anti-tampering module was blocking any write or rename
operations for values inside the `cyserver.exe` registry key and
triggered alert whenever it was attempted.

![Original IFEO registry for `cyserver.exe`
process](registry.png){#fig:mesh1 width="100%"}

We have managed to bypass this detection by renaming the original
`cyserver.exe` key and creating a manipulated clone. This clone
contained the Debugger value linked to
`C:``\``Windows``\``System32``\``calc.exe`. Finally, we have renamed
that clone to masquerade original `cyserver.exe` key.

![Malicious IFEO registry before renaming it to
`cyserver.exe`](before-rename.png){#fig:mesh2 width="100%"}

When the system is rebooted, Windows system reads IFEO registry for
every process it launches. When launching `cyserver.exe` it receives
instruction to attach debugger to it. This is accomplished by passing
the cyserver executable path as an argument to the `calc.exe` (our fake
debugger), which `calc.exe` ignores. As a result system will try to
launch calculator as a protected process. Since calculator does not meet
the requirements to do that, service will fail to launch.

# Lessons Learned

Before closing this report we would like to share some conclusions we
have made during our investigation project.

-   Avoid developing custom server verification methods. For example, do
    not rely on URL checks only.

-   Don't verify processes based on the image name.

-   User's ability to rename and delete files or registry keys can
    result in write access. Therefore, strict access control is
    required.

-   And last but not least, least privilege access. Remove admin rights,
    when they are not essential!

As mentioned above, all vulnerabilities were fixed in the new content
updates CU-1290 and CU-1340. If your organization is using the Cortex
XDR, make sure that all of the agent have received the content updates
mentioned above.
